A program begins as a few lines of source code — and unfolds into something huge and detailed.
Here's an honest question, not a claim: could reality work the same way?
Could the rules of our universe be the output of something tiny — compiled, not chosen?
Let's look at where that idea leads — and how it could fail.
Start at the end — with what this one idea actually produces.
Almost the whole Standard Model — our rulebook for every known particle and force:
the forces, why matter comes in three families, the single Higgs, the masses, how they mix.
Gravity — Einstein's equation, with its constants fixed instead of assumed.
Pieces of cosmology — the early universe, how much ordinary matter there is, dark energy.
The strength of light — the famous one over one-thirty-seven — is just one line among many.
And twenty-three concrete, testable predictions. That's the output. The real question: from how much input?
Here's the surprising part: almost nothing goes in.
Two numbers. A tempo — set by the edge of space. And a width: how many slots the building block has — five.
And those two aren't even truly free. Strip it down, and what's left is one small whole-number pattern — and π.
A huge, detailed result from a tiny source.
That gap — between almost nothing and all of this — is the whole story.
How can two numbers carry that much? Because they don't just get plugged in —
they have to pass a test.
The parts they build must fit into one rigid mathematical object: E₈.
E₈ isn't a force of nature. It's a proof layer — the referee that certifies the pieces fit only one way.
Two hundred and forty points, one perfect pattern.
If anything were off, nothing would lock. Most possible universes simply don't compile.
Now turn it around. If the proof closes for only one tempo and one width…
…then the proof decides them. The inputs are forced by the structure they build.
The thing works out its own starting point. The loop closes on itself.
That's the fixed point the theory is named after.
Not a model you tune until it fits — a structure that has to be what it is.
Once you see it, the elegance is hard to miss.
The same small numbers — two, three, five — run through every part, because it's all one object.
And it isn't frozen. A simple clock gives the whole thing a single resting state.
So the constants aren't dialled in by hand — they're where it settles. Almost no free choices, one connected picture.
Now the fair objection: small whole numbers that fit reality —
isn't that just numerology, like seeing faces in clouds?
We took it seriously. Nobody drew this picture top-down. It assembled itself —
out of hundreds of small, independent checks, each verified by computer, that slowly clicked into one whole.
E₈ proves the pieces can fit. These checks prove we're not fooling ourselves —
every load-bearing claim machine-verified twice, with a team tasked to break it.
We froze predictions before the data, then ran two hundred thousand random look-alikes.
They get at most five right; this gets all thirteen. By luck? Below one in 10³⁰ — effectively zero.
It isn't finished, and we don't pretend it is.
One theorem from sealing the core; a few bridges to known physics; one unit no pure number can give.
Every gap is labelled — and it's killable: neutrino mass, proton decay, dark energy. One miss, and it's wrong.
So — is reality compiled? We don't know. That's the honest answer.
But there's now a version you can test: built from almost nothing, fitting a surprising amount,
with every gap marked and every test named.
Maybe the constants were never arbitrary. Maybe they simply had to add up.